The cities of refuge
—that was a merciful provision of God.
But we might link it to something
that could involve all of us,
and that is the common expression
“Forgive and forget.”
I’m sure you’ve heard it,
and maybe you have tried to apply it.
But maybe at the outset,
ask yourself,
‘Were the cities of refuge
a provision to forgive and forget?’
Well, if you were there
and some men were chopping a tree
and the ax head flew off
and bonked your uncle,
killing him,
do you think you’d be in position to say:
“Oh, well, it was an accident.
You didn’t mean it.
You feel sorry, so why don’t we
just forgive and forget?”
No, that wasn’t possible
because the sanctity of life and blood
were involved in that case.
But do they suggest (the cities of refuge)
that God, though merciful,
does not forgive or forget?
Well, if you open
to the fourth chapter of Ephesians,
there is a verse there
that makes it clear what the answer is.
That is, Ephesians 4:32:
“But become kind to one another,
“tenderly compassionate,
freely forgiving one another
“just as God also by Christ
freely forgave you.”
So, certainly, we wouldn’t disagree
that God is able to forgive.
As to forgetting,
in Jeremiah chapter 31,
the comment
(with regard to the new covenant) said:
“I will forgive their error,
and I will no longer remember their sin.”
So does God forgive and forget?
Think of the account of David.
We know of his grievous sin.
Still, afterward,
God said to Solomon (with regard to David)
that ‘David walked,
with integrity of heart with uprightness,
by doing according to all that I commanded.’
So, clearly, God had forgiven David.
But how about forgetting?
Did God forget David’s sins?
We know about them
because they’re recorded in the Bible.
We don’t forget them, and certainly
by God recording them in the Bible,
it shows that he doesn’t forget them
in the strictest sense of the word.
But with regard to David’s serious sins,
God was able to forget
in the sense of putting behind Him
David’s sins and not remembering them
in the sense of calling them back
to punish David time and time again.
He—that is, God—
put David’s sins behind Him.
Well, what about us and the encouragement
to forgive and forget?
We know that there are times,
as mentioned earlier today,
when individuals may rub us the wrong way
or say something hurtful about us;
maybe it’s like a stab of a sword.
They may do something thoughtless;
they may even betray a confidence
and hurt us in that way.
So, what’s our reaction going to be?
get angry?
say something harsh in return?
maybe simply avoid
the brother or sister thereafter?
Well, we mentioned Ephesians 4:32,
read it, and it said:
“Freely forgiving one another
“just as God
also by Christ freely forgave you.”
So, clearly, if we want to imitate God,
then that involves being willing to forgive,
and that means
putting the individual’s trespasses
behind us.
Realistically, though,
how can we go about that?
We might think of some physical wounds
to illustrate the point.
Some wounds are small and light
and others more serious or deeper,
and they don’t all require the same reaction.
But let’s just imagine
that we had an envelope
and we used our finger to open the envelope,
and in the process we got a paper cut.
“Ow!
Wow, that hurt!”
We wished we had used a letter opener.
We didn’t.
We used our finger, and it really hurt.
But isn’t it true that if you’ve done that,
a day or two later
you can’t even remember where the wound is?
I mean, you cut yourself,
but you’ve forgotten it.
Some wounds, of course,
are more serious or deeper.
Let’s just say that you needed
an emergency appendectomy,
and it wasn’t going to be done
laparoscopically
with three small holes
but rather with an open incision.
Now, after that, would it be rational
to stick your finger through the incision
and kind of poke around inside
where the appendix had been?
Would poking around in the wound help things?
Or, rather, do we let it go
—forget about it?
It might be hurtful to walk for a few days,
but in time, it’s behind you.
And, in fact, now,
if you’ve had an appendectomy,
you probably don’t think about it,
and maybe it’s been years
since you thought about it.
Oh, granted, there may be
a small scar on your abdomen,
but it’s been put behind you.
Can that same concept be applied
to unkind things that have been said about us
by someone who hurt us,
perhaps betrayed a trust?
Now what?
Colossians chapter 3,
we might read the whole verse,
verse 13:
“Continue putting up with one another
“and forgiving one another freely
“even if anyone has
“a cause for complaint against another.
“Just as Jehovah freely forgave you,
you must also do the same.”
Now, we want to imitate Jehovah, do we not?
And if God freely forgives,
is that not an incentive for us
to try to do the same?
Now, granted, that doesn’t mean
that Jehovah has forgotten
the trespass against us.
Can we?
Maybe, maybe not.
We do recall what Jesus said
in the model prayer, however,
when he said that ‘as we forgive
the trespasses of others
so God will accordingly
forgive our trespasses.’
Conversely, if we are disinclined
to forgive the trespasses of others,
what can we expect of God for us?
So, then, what is the essence,
applied personally,
of this encouragement to forgive and forget?
It means to forgive
in the sense of letting go,
not holding on to the anger,
not feeling constant resentment thereafter,
or not even gossiping
about what was done that hurt us.
Maybe it really is quite immaterial.
Maybe it’s simply like a paper cut:
In a couple of days, we don’t
even remember where the wound is.
Can we do that with regard to the offense,
or the hurt, personally?
But even with something more serious
—an offense that seems deeper—
can we be like Jehovah
by forgetting in the sense of putting
it behind us?
Just as Jehovah didn’t thereafter
punish David time and time again,
can we put the fellow servant’s error,
offense,
perhaps a lack of trust—
Can we put those things behind us
just realizing that he or she
is still our brother?
And it’s an imperfect brother
just as we’re imperfect,
but put it behind and forgive the trespass
just as Jehovah forgives our trespasses.